NOTE: Partial Transcript

CHAPTER I.
ABSENCE OF SEXUAL DESIRE.
Without venereal desire the act of sexual inter¬
course would probably be rarely if ever performed.
Ambroise Pare,* with his customary plainness of
speech, says:
“ A certain great pleasure accompanieth the function
of the parts appointed for generation ; and before it, in
living creatures that are of a lusty age, when matter
aboundeth in those parts, there goeth a certain fervent
or furious desire; the causes thereof many, of which
the chiefest is: That the kind may be preserved and
kept forever by the propagation and institution of other
living creatures of the same kind. For brute beasts,
which want reason, and therefore cannot be solicitous
for the preservation of their kind, never come to carnal
copulation unless they be moved thereunto by a certain
vehement provocation of unbridled lust, and, as it were,
by the stimulation of venery. But man that is endowed
with reason, being a divine and most noble creature,
would never yield nor make his mind so subject to a (pg 11) 

thing so abject and filthy as is carnal copulation, but
that the venereous ticklings raised in those parts relax
the severity of his mind; or reason admonisheth him
that the memory of his name ought not to end with his
life, but to be preserved unto all generations as far as
may be possible by the propagation of his seed or
issue.”
I. Original Absence of all Sexual Desire.—
That there are persons in apparent good health who
have never experienced sexual desires is undoubted,
though the number of such individuals in the male sex
is exceedingly small. It is said that Sir Isaac Newton
never had sexual intercourse, and the fact has been
brought forward as an illustration of the point in ques¬
tion, but I think unwarrantably. In all my experience
but two cases of the kind have come under my observa¬
tion, and these are of so interesting a character that 1
do not hesitate to give the details in this place.
Mr. W., aged 33, a strong, well-built, and apparently
healthy man, consulted me, December 11, i860, in order,
as he said, to ascertain if anything could be done for
him. He stated that he had never experienced the
slightest desire for sexual intercourse nor any venereal
excitement, though the latter he had repeatedly, by
reading libidinous books and association with lewd
women, endeavored to produce. So far, however, from
the wished-for effect resulting, the consequence was
always the opposite, his repugnance increasing, and if
the attempts were persevered with, nausea and vomit- 
(pg 12)

ing, accompanied with nervous and physical prostration,
ensued. He declared that he had never practiced mas¬
turbation, but that since he had attained the age of
seventeen he had had in his sleep what he supposed
were seminal emissions, about once in two or three
months. Upon one occasion he had persisted in the
attempt at intercourse, notwithstanding the absence of
desire and the unpleasant mental and physical phenom¬
ena which were produced; but though there was a
vigorous erection caused by manual solicitation on the
part of the Circe upon whom the attempt was made,
this was at once dissipitated as soon as entrance was at¬
tempted. He was then about twenty-two years of age
and the experiment taught him that there might be plea¬
sure in masturbation. As I have said, however, he was
very emphatic in declaring that he had never indulged
in this vice ; and as his language and manner were frank
in the extreme I have no reason to doubt the truth of
his declaration. Frequently, as he had informed me,
he had endeavored to excite desire by imagining erotic
scenes of various kinds, but though erections were pro¬
duced, there was no desire. On the contrary, feelings
of repugnance and disgust were at once excited.
Here apparently there was the ability to experience
erections from psychical and tactile excitations, but
the sexual appetite appeared to be undeveloped, and
in addition there was the remarkable idiosyncrasy of
disgust instead of pleasure being excited at the idea
of copulation. But, for this latter circumstance, the 
(page 13)

patient could undoubtedly have mechanically gone
through the act of intercourse, and perhaps have ex¬
perienced pleasure from the operation.
There were many reasons why this gentleman should
marry. There was a considerable property held in trust
for any children he might have, but which without
offspring of his would go from his family partly to
people strangers to him and partly to certain charita¬
ble institutions. And again, strange as it may seem,
he liked the companionship of women and was anxious
to have a home of his own, and a wife with whom he
might at least associate in a platonic way. In his pres¬
ent condition, he felt that all these things were impos¬
sible, and so he had come to me hoping that in the re¬
sources of medicine there might be something that
would alter his nature so as to make sexual intercourse
possible to him, even if the development of desire were
out of the question.
I saw no way of doing this, however, unless it might
be possible for him to accomplish the sexual act not¬
withstanding the disgust, the faintness, the nausea and
vomiting, and by perseverance to overcome the idio¬
syncrasy. He promised to make the attempt repeat¬
edly, but he reported about a month afterward that the
plan of treatment was impossible. He went into the
civil war, and was killed at either Antietam or Gettys¬
burg.
In the other case the patient, a man 27 years of age,
had never experienced sexual desire, though the or 
(page 14)

gans were of full size and well-formed. Erections were
readily produced by frictions of the penis, or by the
application of heat, or even by lying on the back; but,
instead of the ordinary venereal desires being excited,
there was an overwhelming inclination to drink alco¬
holic liquor in large quantities, and a drunken debauch
was the consequence. Towards women there was a
strong feeling of disgust, and a still more powerful dis¬
inclination to sexual intercourse. Many times the at¬
tempt to effect entrance had been made while an erec¬
tion existed, but at once the penis became flaccid. In
this instance, there was the reciprocal effect of erec¬
tions being produced by the desire for alcohol, and
under such a circumstance masturbation had often been
practiced. This patient eventually died comatose dur¬
ing a severe attack of cerebral congestion.
II. Acquired Absence of Desire.—There are vari¬
ous circumstances which exert an influence in abolish¬
ing the natural sexual desire of the individual. Among
these are :
a. Mental preoccupation.—It is well known that when
the mind is intensely engaged with engrossing subjects
of a character foreign to the animal passion, venereal
excitement is not experienced. Every man is, more or
less, familiar with this fact from his own experience,
and in the majority of cases the impotence thus in¬
duced is of a temporary character—the desire return¬
ing with the cessation of the mental preoccupation.
But, in some instances, the mind is so continuously ab-
(15)

sorbed with other thoughts and emotions that the sex¬
ual appetite is altogether abolished, and does not return
even if there be periods of intellectual or emotional re¬
laxation. Sir Isaac Newton, it is said, never had sex¬
ual intercourse. Perhaps it would be going too far to
say that he never experienced the desire ; but, occupied
as his mind was with subjects requiring the most severe
and continuous thought, it is quite probable that he was
from this cause practically incapable of copulation.
The mere diversion of the mind, even for an instant, is
sufficient, as Sterne has ludicrously reminded us, to
render a man temporarily sexually impotent.
Of this temporary impotence from a sudden cessa¬
tion of the desire by the thoughts being suddenly di¬
verted into another channel during the act of sexual
intercourse, several interesting cases have come under
my observation.
A gentleman, a married man, and the picture of ro¬
bust health, consulted me for a trouble of the kind un¬
der which he labored. Pie had been recently married
and was much attached to his wife, but for a year past
whenever he had attempted sexual intercourse some
thought often of a ludicrous character would take pos¬
session of his mind, and extinguish all desire at the
very moment that the orgasm was beginning. At once
the penis became flaccid and the act remained un¬
accomplished. As an instance, he informed me that the
previous night he had made an effort to have connection
with his wife. The erection was vigorous, but just as
(16)

he acme was being reached a funny story he had read
that day in a comic newspaper flashed through his
mind. His desire at once vanished, the penis lost its
turgescence and the emission did not take place. On a
previous occasion, under similar circumstances, the
thought of a purchase he had concluded occurred to
him, and a like result ensued.
These repeated failures and disappointments had
created a great deal of mental disturbance. He had
become low-spirited almost to the point of melancho¬
lia, and had several times entertained serious thoughts
of suicide.
In another case, the patient, a young man, whose
mind was severely taxed by the nature of his occupa¬
tion, which was that of a professional gambler, experi¬
enced when his nightly work was over strong sexual
desires which he was unable to gratify, for in the act of
intercourse some technical matter connected with his
business was sure to come up in his mind with the
effect of extinguishing all desire and with it all power.
In both these cases and in others which have come
within the range of my personal experience, I found
that the subjects were extremely impressionable individ¬
uals, and that the first occurrence of the kind which in
most other persons would have made no lasting im¬
pression on the mind produced with them such an
effect that at the next attempt at intercourse the fear
was excited that a repetition of the disturbance would
ensue, and as a consequence the apprehension was rea- 
(17)

lized. After that, on every similar attempt, there was
a like fear that some thought would obtrude itself, and
owing to the exercise of the principle of “ expectant
attention,” the thing upon which the mind was concen¬
trated and which was so greatly feared occurred with
painful punctuality. It is an essential feature to the
due performance of sexual intercourse that the man
should have confidence in himself. If this is weakened,
aud still more if it is destroyed, disappointment is sure
to result, and a condition of impotence is established.
In the treatment of cases of this nature, ii is neces¬
sary in the first place to rid the patient of his ap¬
prehension, so that he will make the attempt without
experiencing the slightest fear that anything is going
to occur to interrupt the normal performance of the
act. The only way with which I am acquainted by
which this can be done is for the patient to abstain ab¬
solutely from all attempts for several months. By this
course the appetite usually becomes so strong, in a man
otherwise vigorous, that the desire overrides all possi¬
ble fears, and when once this result can be attained
there is no longer any danger of a recurrence of the
trouble.
I therefore advised the married gentleman to occupy
a separate room from that used by his wife, and on no
account to attempt intercourse for three months; I
expected by this course to break up the habit into
which his brain had fallen of associating incongruous
ideas with the act of intercourse, as well as to allow
(18)

the center for the sexual appetite, to acquire, by re¬
pose, increased strength. With similar objects in view,
I advised the other patient to take a sea voyage which
he had in contemplation, and not to attempt intercourse
till his return, which would not be for a period of
nearly four months. The treatment was so perfectly
successful with both subjects that there was not the
least difficulty when the periods of probation had ex¬
pired.
In another case, the patient, a civil engineer, and
engaged in work requiring extensive mathematical cal¬
culations, found that his desires were altogether ex¬
tinguished. There was nothing very astonishing in
this, for such studies are of all things most calculated
to divert the mind from sexual matters and to extin¬
guish desire. So powerful is this influence, that MM.
Grimaud de Caux and Martin Saint Ange * advise the
reading of mathematical treatises as one of the most
effectual means of subduing excessive venereal excite¬
ment. Moreover, Broussais f has observed that the
genesic power is weakened by the mental concentration
required in mathematical studies. In his lectures on
phrenology delivered before the Faculty of Medicine of
Paris, he not only insisted upon this point, but he ex¬
hibited two heads of eminent deceased mathematicians
who not only were never married but who had an
(19)

aversion to the female sex and who had never, as was
said, had sexual intercourse.*
But to return to the case of the engineer: while oc¬
cupied with the calculations requisite to the higher per¬
formance of the extensive work on which he was en¬
gaged, and which required about fourteen hours daily
of severe mental labor, he experienced no sexual desire
and did not for over a year, though a married man,
attempt intercourse. Indeed, his repugnance thereto
was so great that for fear he might be tempted he had
induced his wife to make a visit to Europe, and she had
been absent several months, and had just returned
when the case was brought to my attention.
Soon after her reappearance in his home, he had, so
he informed me, more as a matter of duty and affec¬
tion, than from any venereal inclination on his part,
attempted sexual intercourse, but had miserably failed.
There was no desire, and it was impossible to reawaken
an appetite that had long been extinguished. Such a
state of affairs could not long continue without the
peace and harmony which had hitherto existed in his
family being in great danger of disturbance. Already
he was fearful that his wife would attribute his impo¬
tence to excesses with other women, and so he had
determined to take medical advice in regard to his
disorder.
I found, on examination, that there was no trouble
(20)

with the functions or structure of the genital organs.
The penis was of full size, and the testicles were large,
firm and free from disease. Nocturnal emissions oc¬
curred on an average about once a month, generally
with, but sometimes without, lascivious dreams. Erec¬
tions often took place during the night, and were pain¬
ful, but were unaccompanied with desire. Apparently
they were the result of congestion of the cord from
lying on the back, and from distension of the bladder
with urine. The patient was satisfied that if his desires
could once be awakened there would be no difficulty in
the physiological performance of the sexual act, and
he was now anxious that they should be restored to
their former degree of activity. For while there had
never been excesses, there had, up to the beginning of
the period mentioned, been a full degree of sexual in¬
clination and power. Conversation, however, with
him, convinced me that there was no anxiety on his
part for the restoration of his sexual health based upon
any other feelings than a regard for the proprieties of
the situation and a fear of the ultimate consequence to
his health and his domestic felicity. As to venereal
appetite there did not appear to be a vestige.
Upon mature reflection I saw no way of materially
benefitting the patient except by his giving up his work
for a time and devoting himself entirely to the society of
his wife. At the same time I advised the application of
statical electricity to the nape of the neck with the view
of obtaining its counter-irritant action, as well as its
(21)

expectant effect on the mind of the patient. So strong
were the motives by which he was actuated that he at
once resigned his very lucrative situation and sub¬
mitted himself to the treatment advised. He purchased
a little villa near the city, moved into it with his wife,
and practically renewed his courtship of seven years
previously. In accordance, further, with my advice,
he made no attempts at intercourse, but waited patient-
ly for the revivification of his desires. His restoration
to health was not long postponed, for within three
months he began to experience propensities to which
for so long a time he had been a stranger, and after that
the complete recovery was well assured. Aided by
the good sense of his wife, to whom I fully explained
the situation, and who, confident of possessing her hus¬
band’s affections, acted throughout with rare kindness
and discretion, there was no interruption to the course
of his restoration. He will not soon forget, however,
that Urania is a more exacting and exhausting mistress
than Venus herself.
A case is cited by Grimaud de Caux and Saint Ange in
which a celebrated mathematician was always diverted
from the complete performance of the sexual act by the
recurrence to his mind of problems of geometry, or of
equations which had occurred to him during the day.
The treatment was different from that which I have
recommended in similar cases, and consisted in his wife
being advised not to allow the approaches of her hus¬
band unless he was in a state of semi-intoxication
(22)