Sexual Orientation and Self.Perception 171
sexual orientation self·attributions to see how well the first two variables would
predict the third.
The first step in this project was selecting the instruments by which these
variables could be measured. For the outcome variable, self-attributions, the
choice of measures was simple. We presented and explained Kinsey's 7-point
scale and asked subjects where they would assign themselves. In addition, we
asked subjects which of the following labels they would give to themselves if
they had to choose-' 'straight, " . 'bisexual," or "gay." In fact, out of 185
subjects, there was a perfect correspondence between Kinsey self-ratings and our
three labels. All subjects who placed themselves on the first third of the Kinsey
scale also labeled themselves . 'straight' '; all subjects who placed themselves on
the middle third of the Kinsey scale labeled themselves "bisexual' '; and all
subjects who placed themselves on the last third of the Kinsey scale called
themselves . ·gay. " For simplicity, we performed all our analyses using the
simpler, tripartite label measure.
Selecting a suitable measure of the first input variable, gender characteris-
tics, was made more complicated by recent advances in research on masculinity
and femininity. In a review of this literature, Constantinople (1973) points out
that past theorists and researchers thought of masculinity and femininity as oppo-
site ends of a unidimensional continuum. One implication of a unidimensional
construct is that to the degree one is more masculine, one must be less feminine,
and vice versa. But internal analyses of masculinity-femininity scales in combi-
nation with other data suggested that masculinity and femininity are not perfectly
correlated. Instead, masculinity and femininity seem to operate as two separate
dimensions; people can be low on both, high on both, or high on one and low on
the other.
Evidence is mounting rapidly that a two-dimensional concept of masculinity
and femininity is more valid, accurate, and useful. Two large research programs
are presently investigating the bidimensionality of masculinity and femininity
(Bem, 1974; Spence & Helmreich, 1978). Both research projects have developed
and validated bidimensional scales of gender attributes. For a variety of reasons
which are tangential to our present discussion, we selected the Spence and
Helmreich (1978) instrument, the Personal Attributes Questionnaire (PAQ) as
the measure of gender characteristics in our initial research. The PAQ contains
24 items asking prople about their behaviors, feelings, and personal characteris-
tics. Of these items 8 form a masculinity scale and 8 form a femininity scale.
Subjects' scores on each scale are compared to normative statistics and are coded
as above or below the population median for both sexes on each scale. On the
basis of these median splits, subjects are then classified into one of four gender
attribute categories: traditional masculine (high score on the masculine scale and
low on the feminine), traditional feminine (high on feminine, low on masculine),
androgynous (high on both scales), or undifferentiated (low on both scales).
172 Michael D. Storms
For a measure of our second input variable, erotic fantasies, the literature
provided us with no established instrument. Kinsey and his co-workers (Kinsey
et al., 1948; Kinsey et al., 1953) are the only individuals who have done
substantial research on erotic fantasies and sexual orientation, and they used a
complicated interview methodology that would be impractical for our purposes.
Before we could proceed any further, it was necessary to develop our own
questionnaire measure of erotic fantasies.
In considering how to construct an erotic fantasies scale, we noted the
parallel between the Kinsey sexual orientation scale and past research on
masculinity-femininity. The Kinsey unidimensional continuum of sexual prefer-
ence was an earth-shaking conceptual breakthrough in its day. But now it may be
outmoded in exactly the same way that old masculinity-femininity scales are
outmoded. Heterosexuality and homosexuality, like masculinity and femininity,
may be two separate dimensions.
A two-dimensional conceptualization of erotic impulse has immediate intui-
tive appeal. Just as in Spence and Helmreich's (1978) work, it suggests a matrix
of four erotic orientation categories: heteroerotic (people who are high on
heteroerotic fantasy and low on homoerotic fantasy), homoerotic (high on
homoerotic fantasy, low on heteroerotic), ambierotic (high on both), and anerotic
(low on both).
A bidimensional construct of erotic orientation has at least two possible
advantages over a unidimensional construct. First, a two-dimension matrix
creates a category for asexual individuals, who do not fit anywhere on the Kinsey
scale. Second, a two-dimensional system implies a different view of bisexual
individuals. On a unidimensional scale a person loses degrees of one quality as
he or she moves toward the other end of the scale; thus bisexuals on the Kinsey
scale are seen as half heterosexual and half homosexual, or a compromise some-
where between the two. But on a two-dimensional map, bisexuals are those
individuals who are high on both homoerotic and heteroerotic orientation, not
medium on both.
In our own research, we have collected data that suggest that bisexuals are
extremely high on both homoeroticism and heteroeroticism (Storms et al.,
1977). We asked a class of 73 male and female college students to report the
extent and frequency of their homoerotic and heteroerotic fantasies on two
6-point scales (0 = none to 5 = very frequently). The II subjects who labeled
themselves bisexual reported as much heteroerotic fantasy (4.27) as the 57
heterosexuals (4.53), both groups reporting more than the 5 homosexual subjects
(3.20).2 Similarly, the bisexuals reported as much homoerotic fantasy (4.36) as
the homosexuals (4.80), both groups reporting more than the heterosexuals
2 Significant at p < .05, by two-tailed I-tests using an error term based on the overall MS-within
adjusted for each pair of unequal ns.
Sexual Orientation and Self-Perception 173
(1.67). It would be incorrect, given these data, to think of bisexual individuals as
having moderate amounts of erotic fantasy somewhere between those of
heterosexuals and homosexuals. Instead, bisexuals experience large amounts of
both types of sexual fantasy, in concurrence with the notion that bisexuals are
high on two separate dimensions of erotic orientation.
Given the plausibility of separate dimensions for homoeroticism and
heteroeroticism, we constructed a two-scale erotic fantasy questionnaire, called
EROS (Erotic Response and Orientation Scales). Each scale on EROS described
eight basic types of erotic fantasy experiences including, for example, thinking
that another person is sexually attractive, thinking about having sex with another
person, daydreaming about sex, and masturbating while thinking about sex. On
one scale, each of the eight erotic items was described with men as the object of
the fantasy (the androerotic scale). On the other scale, women were described as
the object of the fantasy (the gynoerotic scale). On each item, subjects were
asked how often they had had that erotic fantasy experience, from "never" to
"almost daily. "
Before EROS was used to test the self-attribution model, it was first sub-
jected to a pilot study to ascertain its basic psychometric properties. EROS was
administered to 70 college students (31 men and 39 women) in two lower-level
psychology courses. Subjects' responses on each of the two scales were treated to
Guttman Scalogram analyses. Those analyses first revealed that the most valid
way of scoring each item was dichotomously, with a score of 0 for each item the
subject reported never having experienced and a score of 1 for each item the
subject reported having experienced at least occasionally. The Guttman analyses
indicated that this way of scoring produced scales that were internally reliable
(coefficients of reproducibility were .935 and. 917 for the androerotic and
gynoerotic scales, respectively) and internally valid in the sense of being coher-
ent and cumulative (coefficients of scalability were .701 and .713).
Once we were assured of having internally reliable and valid scales, our
next concern was how to use the scales to classify subjects into the four erotic
orientation categories of heteroerotic, homoerotic, ambierotic, and anerotic.
Again, following Spence and Helrnreich's (1978) lead, we calculated the overall
medians on each scale by averaging the medians of female subjects and male
subjects. This procedure produced a midpoint of 6.5 on the androerotic scale and
5.5 on the gynoerotic scale. Female subjects who scored above the androerotic
midpoint and below the gynoerotic midpoint, and male subjects who scored
below the androerotic midpoint and above the gynoerotic midpoint, were
classified as heteroerotic. Women below the androerotic and above the gynoero-
tic midpoints, and men above the androerotic and below the gynoerotic mid-
points, were classified as homoerotic. All subjects above both midpoints were
classified as ambierotic, and all subjects below both midpoints were classified as
anerotic.
174 Michael D. Storms
The distribution of subjects across the four erotic categories was calculated
next and the results are presented in Figure I. The patterns thus produced were
highly encouraging in that they closely match the Kinsey (Kinsey et al., 1948;
Kinsey et al., 1953) data on the distribution of sexual orientations in the popula-
tion. Kinsey reported that approximately 4% of the population is exclusively
homosexual and EROS identified 4%-5% of our sample as homoerotic. They
reported that approximately 60% of the population is exclusively heterosexual,
and EROS identified 64% of our sample as heteroerotic. Finally, they reported
that about 35% of the popUlation has a mixed heterosexual and homosexual
orientation. The Kinsey studies did not provide data to distinguish between
bisexuals and asexuals. If we assume that since asexuals would show no clear
heterosexual or homosexual preference they may have been counted as bisexuals
in the Kinsey research, then the Kinsey figure of 35% comes close to the total
percentage of anerotics (5%) and arnbierotics (27%) identified by EROS.
Since EROS appeared to have satisfactory internal psychometric properties
and some indication of external validity, it was adopted as a tentative measure of
erotic orientation for our preliminary study of sexual orientation self-attributions.
The 70 EROS pilot subjects also received the other two key measures, the PAQ
measure of gender characteristics and the self-attribution questions, and were
included in the main study. But it was also desirable to increase the number of
homosexual individuals in the main study. Therefore, an additional 115 subjects
(55 men and 60 women) were recruited from campus gay student organizations.
In summary, in the main study 185 college students (86 men and 99 women)
were given a battery of scales designed to measure their gender characteristics,
erotic fantasies, and sexual orientation self-attributions. The hypotheses to be
tested were: (1) that subjects with inverted gender characteristics (i.e., feminine
men and masculine women) would label themselves . 'gay" whereas subjects
with noninverted gender characteristics would label themselves "straight"; and
(2) that subjects with homoerotic fantasies would label themselves "gay"
whereas subjects with heteroerotic fantasies would label themselves' 'straight. "
To test the first hypothesis, that gender characteristics relate to self-
attributions of sexual orientation, subjects' classifications on the PAQ were
compared to their self-assigned sexual orientation labels in separate chi-square
analyses for men and women. 3 As shown in the top part of Table I, no relation-
ship was obtained between these two variables, X2(6) = 5.76, ns., and 6.95, ns.,
for men and women respectively. For men, the percentage of gender-inverted
(feminine) subjects who called themselves gay (42%) was slightly higher than the
percentage of gender-appropriate (masculine) subjects who called themselves
gay (36%); but overall, androgynous men were the most likely to ascribe the
3 Due to the nonparametric nature of the PAQ, EROS, and self-attribution classification systems, all
our analyses were limited to chi squares.
Sexual Orientation and Self-Perception
HOMOEROTIC
FANTASY
HOMOEROTIC
(men: 4%)
(women: 5%)
ANEROTIC
(men: 0%)
(women: 10%)
AMBIEROTIC
(men: 30%)
(women: 23%)
HETEROEROTIC
(men: 66%)
(women: 62%)
HETEROEROTIC
FANTASY
175
Fig. I. Classification of erotic fantasy orientations: homoerotic fantasy = androerotic scale scores
for men and gynoerotic scale scores for women; heteroerotic fantasy = gynoerotic scale scores for
men and androerotic scale scores for women. The midpoint is based on the mean of men's and
women's medians on each scale. Percentages shown are of the normative sample of 31 men and 39
women.
homosexual label to themselves (50%). For women, not one single gender-
inverted (masculine) subject labeled herself gay.4
To test the second hypothesis, that erotic fantasies relate to self-attributions
of sexual orientation, subjects' EROS classifications were compared to their
sexual orientation self-labels in separate chi-square analyses for men and women.
As the bottom part of Table I shows, the degree of association between erotic
fantasies and sexual orientation self-attributions was extremely high and in the
predicted pattern. All the homoerotic men and 80% of the homoerotic women
labeled themselves' 'gay. " All the heteroerotic men and 90% of the heteroerotic
women labeled themselves "straight." Anerotic subjects, although there were
very few of them, all labeled themselves' 'straight. " Finally, ambierotic subjects
were considerably more divided across the three self-attribution categories. De-
spite the ambiguity of the ambierotics, the total pattern produced highly signifi-
cant chi squares for men and women, X2 (6) = 71.49 and 68.70, bothps < .001.
It appears that for homoerotic and heteroerotic individuals, their erotic fan-
tasies alone account almost totally for their sexual orientation self-attributions,
and gender characteristics (at least as measured by the PAQ) are largely irrelevant.
For ambierotic individuals, however, sexual fantasies do not account for their
4 The apparent sex difference between androgynous men (who tended to label themselves "gay") and
androgynous women (who tended to label themselves "straight") can be misleading. Some aspect
of the sampling procedure, which was deliberately rigged to include more homosexuals, may have
produced this difference.
Table I. Cross-Tabulation of Gender Characteristics (PAQ) and Erotic Orientation (EROS) by Sexual Orientation
Self-Attributions
Percentage men's self-attributionsa Percentage women's self-attributionsa
Straight Bisexual Gay Straight Bisexual Gay
Gender characteristics
Androgynous 33.3 (8) 16.7 (4) 50 (12) 54.1 (20) 18.9 (7) 27 (10)
Feminine 47.4 (9) 10.5 (2) 42.1 (8) 77.8 (21) 11.1 (3) 11.1 (3)
Masculine 57.1 (8) 7.1 (I) 35.7 (5) 75 (6) 25 (2) 0
Undifferentiated 66.7 (14) 4.8 (I) 28.6 (6) 73.7 (14) 10.5 (2) 15.8 (3)
Erotic orientations
Ambierotic 15.8 (6) 23.7 (9) 60.5 (23) 45.5 (15) 33.3 (II) 21.2 (7)
Heteroerotic 100 (33) 0 0 97.7 (43) 2.3 (I) 0
Homoerotic 0 0 100 (12) 6.7 (I) 13.3 (2) 80 (12)
Anerotic 100 (I) 0 0 100 (5) 0 0
"Percentages are across rows; raw frequencies are in parentheses. Data represent total sample of 86 men and 99 women excluding missing
observations from 2 men and 2 women on erotic orientation and 8 women on gender characteristics.
...-..I
01
==;;'
=-
~
~
:ao
3
'"
Sexual Orientation and Self-Perception 177
self-attributions. At this point we suspected that perhaps ambierotic subjects
made some use of gender characteristics information in determining their self-
attributions, but that this relationship was obscured in the earlier overall analysis
of PAQ scores. However, a supplementary chi-square analysis of PAQ scores
and sexual orientation self-attributions for ambierotic subjects alone produced
the same results as the earlier overall analysis-no relationship between gender
characteristics and self-attributions.
Current Status of the Sexual Orientation Self-Attribution Model
Initially we proposed that people infer their sexual orientation from informa-
tion about their gender characteristics and erotic fantasies. The data we have col-
lected so far support half of that model.
Clearly a strong association exists between erotic orientation and self-attri-
buted sexual orientation. If an individual's erotic fantasies are predominantly
oriented toward his or her own sex, that individual will think of himself or herself
as gay (although perhaps with some reluctance or anxiety, given the current so-
cial climate).
On the other hand, if an individual experiences a nearly equal mix of
fantasies about both sexes, that information is not sufficient to attribute sexual
orientation, otherwise most ambierotics would label themselves bisexual. In our
entire study, only 9 men (all of them ambierotic) and 14 women (11 of them
ambierotic) chose the bisexual label. The reluctance to call oneself bisexual may
stem from poorly defined roles, lifestyles, social institutions, and subcultures for
bisexuals in our society. Although Kinsey and co-workers (Kinsey et at., 1948;
Kinsey et at., 1953) would argue that most of us are, in fact, bisexual to some
degree, we may experience considerable social pressure to make a more definite
choice between homosexuality and heterosexuality.
Some individuals who have strong ambierotic tendencies may accept the
bisexual label, but most of them probably seek out additional information to
resolve their dilemma. The present study provides no indication of what that
additional information might be. Merely as speculation, we would suggest that
actual sexual experiences may provide the key to understanding an ambierotic's
choice of label. For a variety of reasons, perhaps many of them circumstantial,
an ambierotic individual may accumulate a greater number of homosexual or
heterosexual experiences. In turn, that may lead to a greater likelihood of form-
ing affectional and social bonds with members of one sex or the other, and
developing into a more established straight or gay lifestyle. Obviously, the
collection of sexual experience data is a crucial step to take next in this research.
178 Michael D. Storms
The present data give no support to the hypothesis that gender characteris-
tics infonnation plays a role in the self-attribution process, either for ambierotic
individuals or for any of the other erotic orientation groups. It may be that the
hypothesis is simply untrue, despite the abundant evidence that people believe
homosexuality relates to gender inversion.
On the other hand, it may be that the specific measure of gender characteris-
tics used in this study, Spence and Helmreich's (1978) PAQ, does not reflect the
type of gender characteristics infonnation that people perceive as relevant to
sexual orientation. In fact, the items on the PAQ are rather subtle. They may not
be perceived by subjects as related to gender characteristics, and they may be
irrelevant to subjects' self-concepts of masculinity and femininity. When we
selected the PAQ for our research, we may have failed to distinguish between
gender attributes (or "objective" characteristics of masculinity and femininity)
and sex-role identity (or self-perceptions of masculinity and femininity). In retro-
spect, the PAQ is probably more related to the fonner construct while our model
is more related to the latter.
Nevertheless, the infonnation we gained from the PAQ is not wasted. It is
interesting in its own right that this more objective measure of masculine and
feminine attributes did not correspond to sexual orientation labels for any of our
subjects. That is damaging empirical evidence against the broadly assumed rela-
tionship between gender characteristics and sexual orientation. It will be
paradoxical if future research shows that this assumption still plays a role in the
self-perception process simply because the assumption is widely believed.
A final comment is needed about the issue of causality in the self-attribution
model. For the sake of exposition, we have discussed the model in tenns of
inputs (sex-role identity and erotic fantasy infonnation) and outputs (sexual
orientation self-attributions), which suggests a definite causal sequence. But as
Byrne (1977) recently argued, human sexual development is probably cyclical.
While sex-role identities and erotic fantasies may contribute to self-attributions,
self-attributions in tum may influence the development and perception of sex-
role identities and erotic fantasies. Furthennore, actual sexual experiences,
which we have discussed very little in this paper, may be both an input variable
affecting self-attributions and an output variable affected by self-attributions.
Obviously there is a great deat of conceptual slippage among the definitions of
gender characteristics, sex -role identity, erotic orientation, sexual orientation,
and sexual behavior. Considerable research is required to distinguish among and
show relationships between these constructs before any causal directions can be
specified.
Whatever patterns emerge from this research, one fact is clear. People in
general are bound to be as uncertain about the meaning of sexual orientation as
psychologists are. From that uncertainty, individuals will be fashioning self-
Sexual Orientation and Self-Perception 179
concepts that have enonnous impact on their lifestyles, subculture memberships,
and roles in society.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Much of the thinking behind this chapter, and the original research reported
herein, was developed with the assistance of Craig Hill, Scott Lambers, and
Margaret Stivers. Our efforts were also supported by the University of Kansas
General Research Fund Grand 3313.
References
Bern, D. J. Self-perception: An alternative interpretation of cognitive dissonance phenomena.
Psychological Review, 1967, 74, 183-200.
Bern, S. L. The measure of psychological androgyny. Journal of Clinical and Consulting Psychol·
ogy, 1974,42, 155-162.
Bieber, I., et al. Homosexuality. New York: Random House, 1962.
Byrne, D. Social psychology and the study of sexual behavior. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 1977, 3, 3-30.
Churchill, W. Homosexual behavior among males. New York: Hawthorn, 1967.
Constantinople, A. Masculinity-femininity: An exception to a famous dictum? Psychological Bulle-
tin, 1973, 5, 389-407.
Freud, S. Collected papers (Ed. E. Jones). New York: Basic,1959.
Humphreys, L. Tearoom trade. Chicago: Adline, 1970.
Kelly, H. H. Attribution theory in social psychology. In D. Levine (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on
Motivation, 1967 (Vol. 15). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1967.
Kinsey, A. c., Pomeroy, W. B., & Martin, C. E. Sexual behavior in the human male. Philadelphia:
Saunders, 1948.
Kinsey, A. c., Pomeroy, W. B., Martin, C. E., & Gebhard, P. Sexual behavior in the hU11U/n
fe11U/le. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1953.
Krafft-Ebing, R. von. Psychopathia sexualis (trans. H. E. Wedeck). New York: Putnam, 1965.
Lehne, G. K. Homophobia among men. In D. Davis & R. Bramon (Eds.), The forty-nine percent
majority: Readings on the male sex role. New York: Addison-Wesley, 1975.
Levitt, E., & Klassen, A. Public attitudes toward homosexuality. Part of the 1970 national survey by
the Institute for Sex Research. Journal of Homosexuality, 1974, I, 29-43.
MacDonald, A. P. The importance of sex-role to gay liberation. Homosexual Counseling Journal,
1974, I, 169-180.
Money, J., & Tucker, P. Sexual signatures. Boston: Little, Brown, 1975.
Morin, S. F., & Garfinkle, E. M. Male homophobia. Journal of Social Issues, 1978,34(1),28-42.
Panton, J. H. A new MMPI scale for the identification of homosexuality. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 1960,16, 17-20.
Reuben, D. Everything you always wanted to know about sex . .. but were afraid to ask. New York:
Bantam, 1971.
ISO Michael D. Storms
Spence, J. T., & Helmreich, R. Psychological dimensions of masculinity and femininity: Their
correlates and antecedents. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1978.
Storms, M. D. Attitudes toward homosexuality and femininity in men. Journal of Homosexuality,
1978,3, 257-263.
Storms, M. D., Stivers, M. L., Lambers, S. M., & Hill, c. A. Attitudes toward and personal
experience with homosexuality among college students. Unpublished manuscript, University of
Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, 1977.
Terman, L. M., & Miles, C. C. Sex and personality: Studies in masculinity and femininity. New
York: McGraw-Hili, 1936.
Tripp, C. A. Homosexual matrix. New York: McGraw-Hili, 1975.
Weinberg, G. Society and the healthy homosexual. Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor, 1972.
Weinberg, M. S., & Williams, C. J. Male homosexuals. New York: Oxford University Press, 1974.
