
Teacher's message dismays a parent

By Ann Landers

Creators Syndicate

Dear Ann Landers: My teen-age son came home the other day with a story that floored me. One of his high school teachers is teaching the students that there are five sexes in the human race — male, female, homosexual, bisexual and asexual.

I questioned my son's friends who are in the same class and they confirmed what he had reported. I told my son that the teacher is wrong, that there are only TWO sexes, male and female, and the other categories are sexual practices.

Ann, I'm disturbed by this misinformation. No teacher has the right to present personal opinions as facts. I want to go to the school and speak with that teacher or the principal, but my son has begged me not to. He's afraid it would get him into trouble.

What do the experts say about this? Do they claim there are five sexes nowadays? Things are changing so fast that it's hard to keep up. What should I do about this teacher?

— A Concerned Father in Ukiah, Calif.

Dear Concerned Parent: There are only two sexes — male and female. Recent studies indicate that homosexuality, bisexuality and asexuality are not the result of something that has gone wrong with th e sex organs, but rather a biochemical-genetic alteration that no one has been able to explain.

Exactly why some people are attracted to members of their own sex is a mystery, but these individuals are still either male or female, whichever way they were born, regardless of what turns them on.

That teacher who believes there are five sexes needs to be set straight (no pun intended). I suggest that you speak to other parents in your son's class and go together to the principal's office and register a complaint.

Gem of the Day: When everything in your life seems to be absolutely perfect, something is going wrong that you don't know about yet.

Ann Landers' column is published daily in the Reading Times and Reading Eagle. Write to Ann Landers, Creators Syndicate, 5777 W. Century Blvd., Suite 700, Los Angeles, Calif. 90045.
